Benchmarks
==========

CrystaLLM has been evaluated on the Perov-5, Carbon-24, MP-20 and MPTS-52 benchmarks. This document describes how to 
reproduce the benchmark evaluation experiments described in the paper. The Perov-5, Carbon-24 and MP-20 datasets are
from the [CDVAE repository](https://github.com/txie-93/cdvae/tree/f857f598d6f6cca5dc1ea0582d228f12dcc2c2ea/data), 
while the MPTS-52 dataset is from the 
[DiffCSP repository](https://github.com/jiaor17/DiffCSP/tree/fd6f48cef306193c0fb678db785424abcdad6dfd/data).

To assess CrystaLLM on a benchmark, a sequence of steps is required to: 
1. pre-process the original benchmark dataset
2. tokenize the pre-processed CIF files
3. train the model
4. generate CIF files
5. post-process the generated CIF files
6. compute the benchmark metrics.

Below, we will provide instructions using the Perov-5 benchmark as an example.

### 1. Pre-processing the original benchmark dataset

Prepare the benchmark CSV files:
```shell
python bin/prepare_csv_benchmark.py resources/benchmarks/perov_5/train.csv perov_5_train_orig.tar.gz
python bin/prepare_csv_benchmark.py resources/benchmarks/perov_5/val.csv perov_5_val_orig.tar.gz
python bin/prepare_csv_benchmark.py resources/benchmarks/perov_5/test.csv perov_5_test_orig.tar.gz
```

Convert the .tar.gz files to .pkl.gz files for more efficient processing: 
```shell
python bin/tar_to_pickle.py perov_5_train_orig.tar.gz perov_5_train_orig.pkl.gz
python bin/tar_to_pickle.py perov_5_val_orig.tar.gz perov_5_val_orig.pkl.gz
python bin/tar_to_pickle.py perov_5_test_orig.tar.gz perov_5_test_orig.pkl.gz
```

Pre-process the benchmark CIF files:
```shell
python bin/preprocess.py perov_5_train_orig.pkl.gz --out perov_5_train_prep.pkl.gz --workers 4
python bin/preprocess.py perov_5_val_orig.pkl.gz --out perov_5_val_prep.pkl.gz --workers 4
python bin/preprocess.py perov_5_test_orig.pkl.gz --out perov_5_test_prep.pkl.gz --workers 4
```

### 2. Tokenize the pre-processed CIF files

Tokenize the benchmark training and validation sets:
```shell
python bin/tokenize_cifs.py \
--train_fname perov_5_train_prep.pkl.gz \
--val_fname perov_5_val_prep.pkl.gz \
--out_dir tokens_perov_5/ \
--workers 4
```

### 3. Train the model

Train a CrystaLLM model from scratch using only the benchmark training set:
```shell
python bin/train.py --config=config/crystallm_perov_5_small.yaml device=cuda dtype=float16
```

### 4. Generate CIF files

Generate the prompts from the CIF files of the test set:
```shell
python bin/make_prompts.py perov_5_test_prep.pkl.gz -o prompts_perov_5_test.tar.gz
```

Generate the CIF files, performing 20 generation attempts from each of the prompts: 
```shell
python bin/generate_cifs.py \
--model crystallm_perov_5_small \
--prompts prompts_perov_5_test.tar.gz \
--out gen_perov_5_small_raw.tar.gz \
--device cuda \
--num-gens 20
```

### 5. Post-process the generated CIF files

Post-process the generated CIF files:
```shell
python bin/postprocess.py gen_perov_5_small_raw.tar.gz gen_perov_5_small.tar.gz
```

### 6. Compute the benchmark metrics

To compute the benchmark metrics using all available generations:
```shell
python bin/benchmark_metrics.py gen_perov_5_small.tar.gz perov_5_test_orig.tar.gz
```

To compute the benchmark metrics for the first generation attempt only (i.e. the _n=1_ case):
```shell
python bin/benchmark_metrics.py gen_perov_5_small.tar.gz perov_5_test_orig.tar.gz --num-gens 1
```

The `benchmark_metrics.py` script will process the given collection of CIF files, and compare them to the original CIF 
files. When all the processing is complete, the match rate and RMSE will be printed to the console.

The steps above can be performed with any of the other benchmark datasets as well, by simply substituting `perov_5` 
with `carbon_24`, `mp_20`, or `mpts_52`. For example, to apply this pipeline to Carbon-24, use 
`carbon_24_train_orig.tar.gz` in place of `perov_5_train_orig.tar.gz`, and so forth. The benchmark datasets are located 
in the [resources/benchmarks](resources/benchmarks) folder.

Since the benchmarking pipeline has previously been applied to all the benchmark datasets, we've uploaded the generated 
artifacts for convenience and reproducibility. All artifacts generated by the pipeline can therefore be downloaded 
directly using `bin/download.py`. For example, the tokenized Perov-5 dataset can be downloaded directly using
```shell
python bin/download.py tokens_perov_5.tar.gz
```
Also, the generated CIF files for a benchmark can be downloaded directly:
```shell
python bin/download.py gen_perov_5_small.tar.gz
```

All models come in two sizes: `small` and `large`. One exception is the model trained on the full 2.3M-compound dataset 
minus the MPTS-52 validation and training sets, `crystallm_v1_minus_mpts_52_small.tar.gz`, which is available in the 
small size only. Its generated CIF files can be found in `gen_v1_minus_mpts_52_small.tar.gz` (and the tokens are in 
`tokens_v1_minus_mpts_52.tar.gz`).
